---
title: "How did we get here?"
date: "2015-07-25 12:58:41"
---

Any interested party possessing a passing familiarity to the history of
media has heard this story a thousand times before. It’s become standard
in almost any book or article on the history of cinema, usually going
something like this: *‘Early cinema didn’t really exploit the features
of the medium. The first films were just recorded plays, shot on a
stage, and acted out. It was Eisenstein, Vertov and his wife, and
Kuleshov who changed that when they invented montage.’*

There’s more to the emergence of film than that summary, just like
there’s more to the book to ebook ‘transition’ than swapping out one
medium for another, or adding another format to the hardcover - trade
paperback - mass market paperback lineup.

First of all, much to everyone’s surprise, plays didn’t disappear with
the advent of film, nor did film once TV arrived, and TV’s definitely
still around despite the now several-decade-long existence of the web,
and more ubiquitous digital media.

Second of all film - as a medium and a context, remains informed by the
play - as a medium and context. Film theatres kept many of the trappings
of play theatres for decades - curtains, ushers, gilt mouldings - before
they became the more fast-food-style, commercially driven outlets that
they are today.

Actors frequently switch between cinematic work and theatre, their art
form isn’t bound to one or the other, despite the need to adjust some
facets of it for each medium. There are more, but sorting them out would
turn this into a text exploring the form of film, not a text on text.

The history of these things is difficult to crack apart and lovingly
shove into neat little boxes. As with film, digital text draws from its
predecessors, borrows a lot of its trappings and languages, although, as
has become clear, doesn’t replace it. Newer forms of media rarely
disrupt their predecessors—at least, not in the Clayton Christensen
sense. What happens is that when a new form of media arrives that is
better adapted to a specific environment than others, it tends to push
those less well adapted out of it.

If the older media has no other habitats then it does get
replaced, but throughout the history of media it’s been more common that
the older media merely retreats into their core environment.
Occasionally it gains a new strength because its practitioners refocus
their efforts on the form’s strengths.

And, in turn, the new form only matures once its practice stops being
defined and studied in the context of and using the terms of its
predecessors.

In a mature field, when it comes to *practice* the fate of a form’s
predecessors is immaterial. It doesn’t matter if the predecessors die
out, thrive, or become relicts, you can learn from and steal from them.
The only things that matter to those making the new form of are the two
following questions:

1.  How do we make it?
2.  How do we make it, *better*?

Get started. Start simple. Make it. Improve. If you want to compare your work to
something, compare it to the best of *your* field, not to the canon of a
predecessor that is drawing on a thousand years of distilled genius and
intellectual wealth.

<div class="not-on-single-page" markdown="1">

***

- *[Where are we now?](/How_did_we_get_here/Where_are_we_now.html)*. Ebooks versus digital text. Fluidity and typography. Transformation and symbiosis. Digital as a toddler.

- *[What has been done?](/How_did_we_get_here/What_has_been_done.html)*. Digital isn't a toddler (actually). Advances. Stuff people have done.

- *[Skeuomorphism and remediation](/How_did_we_get_here/Skeuomorphism_and_remediation.html)*. Maturation into a teenager. An independent identity. The "Digital Age". Remediation (bleh).

- *[Exeunt Book](/How_did_we_get_here/Exeunt_book.html)*. Adulthood means separation. New models.

</div>
