---
title: "Serial Fiction"
date: "2015-07-25 14:03:45"
---

## The Right Sort

> Mum doesn’t notice that I nick the odd pill. Valium’s like my power
pill, from Pac-Man. I get nervous too. I took a pill before we left.

> The pill’s just kicking in now. Valium breaks down the world into
bite-sized sentences. Like this one. All lined up. Munch-munch.

> Valium or no Valium, when the dog barks I nearly shit myself and my
lungs fill with dark and my blood fills with a scream—

## Black Box

> People rarely look the way you expect them to, even when you’ve seen
pictures.

> The first thirty seconds in a person’s presence are the most
important.

> If you’re having trouble perceiving and projecting, focus on
projecting.

> Necessary ingredients for a successful projection: giggles; bare legs;
shyness.

> The goal is to be both irresistible and invisible.

> When you succeed, a certain sharpness will go out of his eyes.

## Jeff Noon

> 1/4) Somewhere my phone is ringing. I search my pockets, the sofa, the
table, cupboards, under the sheets on the bed, inside the fridge…

> 2/4) Under floorboards, inside the wall cavities, the back of the
stove. It’s still ringing. I look through filing cabinets, bookshelves…

> 3/4) In the oven, microwave, fireplace. The trash. I take the back off
the television: nothing. But it’s still ringing. And then, finally…

> 4/4) After fifty minutes have passed, I find my phone in a plant pot,
buried in the soil. And I answer it. “Yes? Hello?” It’s still ringing.

***

The first of these is from David Mitchell’s ‘*The Right Sort*’, the
second, Jennifer Egan’s ‘*Black Box*’, the third from Jeff Noon. These
works are not presented to suggest that Mitchell, Egan and Noon are the
only writers working with forms of serial fiction (facilitated in these
instances by Twitter). While we’re here, Joanne Harris is brilliant,
Teju Cole evokes the specifics of place and time in 140 characters like
nobody else. These three are there because they each have something to
show about how reading and writing can be mediated by digital serial
fiction.

First of all though, here’s a warning. If you’ve ever commented in the
Guardian and pointed out how passé this is, or asked rhetorical
questions online as to the point of writing in Twitter, then click here
(next chapter). This bit isn’t for you. We think serial storytelling has
something to offer, something to say, and so let’s not waste your time
by asking you read it.

We read social media. Visually to textually. In combinations of media,
and as a stream. We read it in situ, and out of context. We read
*storify*-ed versions of events, in which we appear briefly, blinking in
the headlights, before the record of the conversation moves on. We see
things moderated, and as streams of data. We move through information
and some of it, some of the aggregation of novelty, the consensual
hallucination, strikes us as interesting.

Our attention lingers.

Each of the three examples above was chosen because it does something
with the nature of serial storytelling and short, social media-stream
updates. David Mitchell’s *The Right Sort*, conceived as a way to garner
interest in Mitchell’s *The Bone Clocks*, was serialised over a few days
in July 2014. Comprising a short episode taking place over a few hours
in the 1970s (but set in the same fictional universe as *The Bone
Clocks*) and told over 280 tweets, the piece is constructed as a very
short story broken into tiny pieces. At the time, Mitchell described
writing in Twitter as a ‘*diabolical treble-strapped textual
straitjacket*’, suggesting that the confines of 140 character bursts of
content did not make for comfortable writing. Of interest in terms of
form and content though, is the use Mitchell made of Twitter’s brevity.
His narrator - Nathan - is in the habit of stealing his mother’s Valium
for a quick high, and while in an altered state, is prone to short,
abstracted descriptions of the world. As quoted above, ’*Valium breaks
down the world into bite-sized sentences. Like this one*’ also displays
a meta-awareness of the form in which it is read. An out of body
experience commenting on the form of the tale’s telling. *The Right
Sort* is too close to a short story in structure to tell us anything
useful about serial fiction and twitter, but Mitchell’s use of the form
does suggest a degree of native understanding. *Black Box* is the most
formally ambitious of the three. Egan crafts something disturbing,
complete.

Jeff Noon uses Twitter as most of the rest of us use air. He breathes it
in, and exhales something utterly ‘other’ as a byproduct of his being in
the world. Noon is a prose stylist,
