---
title: "Writing a Fugue"
date: "2015-07-25 14:12:37"
sort: 11
---

This bit is dangerous. Not because it’s going to explode, or subvert
reality in interesting ways, but because I’m not a musician, I don’t
write music, and my formal education in that regard stopped around age
14. I can play the first four bars of the Star Wars theme on the piano
and harmonica, so something obviously stuck.

The problem with so much Transmedia work, as we've suggested elsewhere, is abundance. An explosion of content with little sense of
structure or control over the manner of storytelling. One of the things
that Transmedia is missing is a grammar; a formal set of patterns for
writing, for thinking about plot and character and delivery. Please note
that I wrote patterns, and not pattern. There isn’t one way of doing
this, any more than there’s one way to write a film, or a novel. But
there are, or there should be, structures and guides. Scaffolds and
defaults.

Fugues
------

A fugue[^1] is a polyphonic musical form. Polyphonic meaning two or more
simultaneous lines of (in this case) melody. Fugue arises from the Latin
*fuga*, meaning to chase, to flee. Fugues begin with a theme called a
*subject*, presented in turn by each voice (or instrument), successively
up or down a key. Just to complicate matters, if a second voice is an
exact transposition of the first, then the Fugue is regarded as real, or
modified, in which case it is tonal. What happens as each voice comes in
to play, is a melodic shape that alters in form as it grows, until a
*countersubject* emerges as an accompaniment to the subject,
complicating the structure.

With me so far?

What happens next is that the composition alternates sections when the
*subject* is present with sections where it is not. These are called
*divertimenti*, and their function is to modulate to different keys, so
to elaborate and counter the central theme over a series of sections.
Within these techniques, the duration of notes can be halved, doubled,
retrograde (played backwards) and inverted (played upside down). Toward
the end, a section - *stretto* - emerges in which the *subject* is
audible through overlapping voices, each one not waiting for the
previous to complete, and so building toward a complex, interconnected
whole that has to be heard, to be read as such to be enjoyed. What is
also critical is that the original *subject* has to be strong enough to
be stacked upon itself and expanded, compressed and elaborated, while
still being distinctive.

That’s how you write a Fugue.

It abides by a complex set of rules and conventions, which are designed
to allow the *subject* to be heard through the (apparent) chaos. To
emerge from a polyphony of voices because each one of those voices is
carefully constructed in order to complement, accompany, elaborate or
divert from the centre. All the while knowing that the end goal is a
designed conclusion.

I work with an artists’ collective called Circumstance. Our work gets a
disproportionate amount of attention here, because I know it
very well. We don’t set out to make Transmedia projects, but some of our
work falls into that category through critique, or misplaced marketing.
We generally make work in public spaces with audio played through
headphones or mobile speakers. It’s cinematic, in that each participant
is placed within a narrative that is situated in a space, and builds
toward a conclusion. They’re also hearing music, which adds to the sense
of cinema. We start with music when we’re writing. Short pieces written
to evoke space, or mood, which are then employed while we test and
develop, gradually becoming the *subject* of the piece in a manner not
unlike a Fugue. It’s fair to say we work backward and from the side in
relation to the way I’ve described a Fugue being written - we generally
don’t have such a defined idea of the musical *subject* being
foregrounded at the outset.

What strikes me though, is that writing, or thinking about writing, a
Fugue is a good model to use when approaching Transmedia work. The
*subject* - the central, driving idea, has to be strong enough to be
lost in voices, and then found again. It has to be robust and clear
enough to survive a potential cacophony. Each character, each platform
in a Transmedia piece is a first-person voice. They speak in their own
way, dictated by the parameters and grammar of the platform they’re
being transmitted through. Those voices should, in the grand scheme of
things, exist for a reason. If it were a novel, then they might be there
to offer an authorial glimpse into another side of the narrative, or to
comment on the story. It’s a Transmedia piece though, so they are going
to be used sparingly, and for effect. Over time, once the story begins
to establish itself, they become a countersubject to the main theme.
They provide depth in the world. They’re there to be trusted, or not. To
be an echo of things we cannot see in the present. Fragments of
surveillance to be studied and interrogated. Regardless, in their
sparing way, they are there to make us think about the subject.

Transmedia is usually *tonal*.

It shouldn’t be forgotten that the player/reader is a voice too. If they
have agency (or the illusion of it), then they’re probably
*divertimenti*, modulating against the subject and moving the story into
different keys. They might not though, and the *subject* can be the
reader themselves.

Transmedia works well when it has an end in sight. It’s just another
form of storytelling, after all, and has an end in sight. What tends to
happen though, is even if the first act is beautifully established, the
middle sprawls and the end is rushed, appearing out of nowhere because
our time is up. This is where halving, doubling, reflecting and
inverting the *subject* plays off. So much Transmedia work - so much
digital work in general - is in thrall to the adventure game syndrome of
having to find every clue, mechanically, in order that the end make
sense. Remove the mechanical and work with the subject. Show us the
tone, and immerse us in music, don’t require us to understand every
little thing.

Like as not we won’t.

No-one aside from the writer will, and if that’s essential for a
satisfactory conclusion, then you have a problem. Far better to impart a
sense of momentum, to show and envelop through characters with purpose.

Good fugues work with repeat listening. A single line of music turns
into a complex texture, but exactly when the trick was pulled is often
only evident the third time we hear the whole piece. We recognise the
successive moments the *subject* appears, noticing layers of
counterpoint and imitation, and sometimes the *subject* is hidden so
cleverly, transformed and inverted so subtly that it can take years to
notice.

Speaking personally, might that be a more laudable aim than solving a
puzzle every fifteen minutes?

[^1]: I am indebted to the University of San Francisco’s Professor of
    Music, Alexandra Amati-Camperi, who’s ‘What is a Fugue’ was,
    frankly, where I made sense of this section:
    <http://www.sfbach.org/what-fugue>
