---
title: "Skeuomorphism and remediation"
date: "2015-07-25 12:59:41"
category: Media_does_not_disrupt
---

One of the biggest differences between a child and a teenager is the
teenager’s attempts at identity formation. Some try to build on their
closest role models; be like dad/mom/Uncle Filbert. Some teenagers try
to produce an identity by taking up a readymade one with a built in
social group, taste in music, and dress code. Some slide into depression
as they try to find themselves. Digital writing, being more than a
single mind performing a single act, is doing the same: some copy from
their elders, some search for the new and the native. It’s all
problematic, of course (it wouldn’t be fun otherwise).

N Katherine Hayles [*Writing Machines*](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/writing-machines) calls to attention the instability
of material transfers between forms. She proposes Material Specificity
as a mechanism by which to deconstruct the existence of texts in a
mixed-media ecology. For Hayles, a number of texts composed in our
digital age recognise the means of their creation.

(“Digital age” is an awkward term, as the digital age didn’t begin with
a bang or a declaration of intent, rather it slipped in through the
edges when no-one was looking for it. A flood or a seeping might be a
better analogy.)

Whether as an inevitable consequence of the mechanisms that brought them
into being, or by deliberate intervention on the part of their author,
materially specific texts reflect the culture they were born into. It
has been written many times that the computer - initially the beige box
on your desk, then the silver-grey laptop and now the smartphone and
tablet, is a medium that consumes all others. Several influential texts
of what we might propose as the first-wave of digital criticism and
futurology espouse this framework as a critical basis on which to
approach content creation. Bolter and Grusin’s *Remediation*, an otherwise
thorough study of early new media and the emergence of natively digital
artefacts, makes the error of leaving the wisdom of this foundation
unchallenged.

In that respect, work that is designed to exist on those platforms,
those shiny new devices with their built-in markets and credit card
payments, will also consume the forms that preceded them. That’s only
part of the answer though. If a medium eats everything, if it remediates
television, print, radio, cinema and theatre, then expelling content
that is the result of that over-caloried diet is overload. Overload by a
measure of content streams (twitter feeds for no reason but that they
exist), fragmented platforms (video, photography and ancillary media in
abundance without recognition of the purpose of a through-line plot) and
overload through simple excess.

This then, is another flaw in the logic of remediative strategies in new
media. By desiring ‘to borrow avidly from each other as well as from
their analog predecessors such as film, television and photography’,
remediated new media content exposes itself to the risk of repeating the
problems encountered by each predecessor. Certainly, new media cannot
operate in cultural isolation from other media forms, but by embracing
this strategy, its potential is curtailed, and in doing so, any
opportunity to genuinely develop new form is strangled at birth.
