---
title: "Games design is huge."
date: "2015-07-25 13:55:32"
return: /Choose_your_structural_grammar.html
---

Lucky for us, there are a lot of books and websites covering the subject
so we really don’t have to do the form an injustice by covering it
badly.

My personal favourites are:

-   [A Theory of
    Fun](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Theory_of_Fun_for_Game_Design)
    by Raph Koster.
-   [Lost Garden](http://www.lostgarden.com) by Daniel Cook. A website
    that is a treasure trove of notes, ideas, theories, experiments, and
    examples on games design theory and practice.

There are more and I’ll add them as I think of them.

Digital media of all kinds is built on a series of action feedback
loops. You do something and the device gives you feedback on that
action. It’s the foundation of User Interface (UI) and User Experience
(UX) design and the basis of everything we do in the field.

The core difference between the structural grammars of games and
hypermedia is that in games the centre of meaning is in the action
feedback loop but in hypermedia it is in the feedback loop’s context.

This difference in grammars expresses itself as different kinds of
structures. Games are a tightly interwoven structure of feedback loops:
one loop leads directly into another and they build on each other like
Lego™ blocks. Sometimes that structure is hierarchical, i.e. levels of
increasing difficulty and requiring increasingly complex actions: finish
one to get to the next). Sometimes it is networked: e.g. a large space
that you can explore where difficulty and complexity is distributed
spatially.

In hypermedia, no matter whether it’s Michael Joyce’s [Afternoon, A
Story](http://www.eastgate.com/catalog/Afternoon.html), [Kottke’s
weblog](http://kottke.org), or [Twitter](https://twitter.com) in its
entirety the centre of meaning is in the context: where you get to after
you take the action. The action only has meaning insofar that it affects
the context. The page or tweet you see is what says something, the link
and following it only modifies it.

The popularity of game mechanics in user interface design complicates
things but mostly because they are usually badly thought out and not
that unique to games.

Some of the things labelled as game mechanics are merely good UX design
practices, like having clear, dynamic, and immediate feedback loops
throughout your app. Others, like using leaderboards and the like to
foster competition and manipulate your users into dehumanising their
fellow people and thinking of them as things to be beaten is a tactic
long used by the managers of sales teams. It, and a lot of other ‘game
mechanics’ are only really competition mechanics and aren’t specific to
games.

In the end, the ‘is it a game or not?’ question doesn’t matter to us.
While the distinction between the two is important when it comes to
understanding the strengths of each, it’s important also to understand
that digital media (as well as a lot of non-digital media) can be more
than one thing at the same time.

You can make a game that works just as well as just a story with all of
the game’s feedback loops dialled down to ‘So Easy a Drooling Infant
Could Do it’. You can make hypermedia, apps, and websites that can be
played like games.

Absolutism doesn’t work for digital. Often the answer to the questions
you ask yourself as a creator will be ‘both’.
