---
title: "More than one genre"
date: "2015-07-25 13:55:05"
category: Choose_your_structural_grammar
---

One of the biggest mistakes you can do is simply lump all digital media
into one and pretend that it’s all the same thing. That’s like
pretending that all print books are alike and that the distinction
between novels, short stories, journalism, poetry, and comics isn’t
meaningful.

Digital storytelling, once you’ve let it settle after shaking it up like
a snow globe, tends to settle into two broad piles, each which can be
subdivided into countless mini-piles.

The first pile, on your imaginary left, is games.

The second pile, on your imaginary right, is hypermedia.

There’s a bit of indistinct sludge in between the two where you can’t
quite tell which pile it’s in. That’s okay. Crisp, paper-like boundaries
are for print anyway.

Games are the more easily recognisable of the two. Not because there’s
more of them (in fact, there’s less) but because they have a much
clearer boundary. When you can’t figure out whether a piece of
storytelling is a game or hypermedia, that’s because it isn’t fitting
the definitions coming out of the games field. Hypermedia doesn’t care.
Hypermedia loves everything and everybody. Possibly a little bit too
much.

Games design is much too big a concept to be covered here. Like poetry
and mechanised print, games predate digital by several millennia. Their
principles, while benefiting enormously from digital, aren’t dependent
on it.

The ‘hypermedia’ that predates computers, on the other hand, works in
ways that are fundamentally different from actual hypermedia. To pull
that off in print, you’d need to be able to perform instantaneous
transformation of matter.

Because it isn’t the link, per se, that puts the ‘hyper’ in hypertext.
It’s the instantaneous and dynamic transformation of one text into
another when you press the link that gives hypertext the oomph we
associate with hyper media.

Think ‘hyperspace’ and you’re on the right track.

The hypertext that you read and enjoy vastly outnumbers the games you
play because hypertext is how the web and apps tell stories.

And almost everything we do on the web and in apps is storytelling.

Facebook’s a story. Twitter’s a story. Blogs are stories. Every website,
every app, every chat platform, they’re all hypertext and they are all
stories.

That most of these are also conversations doesn’t make them any less
hypertextual because hypertext is fundamentally conversational. That’s
what linking and dynamically including texts in a variety of context
does. It makes conversations. That’s hypertext.

Even in a plain old web page, links are conversational. Unlike
references, which are formal even at best of times, links can be witty,
tragic, satirical, tongue-in-cheek, and laugh out loud funny, even when
neither the linking or the linked text are any of these things. Simple
things like linking from a person’s name to the page in a medical
dictionary for restless leg syndrome can be hilarious in the right
context, even when the tone of both texts is serious and deadpan. That’s
hypertext.

Hilarious juxtapositions of tweets or Tumblr posts are a common enough
phenomenon for it to become a regular trope on Twitter and Tumblr.
That’s hypertext.

Even ebooks are hypertext, if only by virtue of their reading context.
Some of them are only accidental hypertexts, sticking to print
conventions and ideas even as they have lost all meaning and sense in
digital. Others, like this book, are written as hypertexts first, where
links are used as one of the primary punctuation marks—more common than
the m-dash, less pretentious than the semicolon.

This is not a book; this is hypertext.

Because this text was written with digital first in mind—unlike those
print books which have been skinned and then re-coated with a digital
gloss—this is a loose, conversational, and sprawling hypertext that
might well eventually be bundled up and stuffed into print form like a
set of clothes stomped into a suitcase while the taxi to the airport is
waiting outside.

Which is fine. If I don’t want you to criticise my preference for
reading print books lifeless, skinned, and flattened into ebook form, I
don’t get to criticise you for preferring to read the ebook as a
bleeding, severed appendage cut off from its network.
