---
title: "Curating your reader"
date: "2015-07-25 13:51:06"
return: /What_do_books_do.html
---

Okay, time to move on to something else, but before we go, a few
thoughts.

What we’ve tried our best to demonstrate is that digital can be
something different, that writing for digital asks new questions of you
- as an author, a designer, an artist of any kind - and that taming the
mutability of digital technology is key to all of this. For a medium
that’s ostensibly all about play; control and scaffolds are paramount.

So, what about the thing you really cannot control. We began this book
with the following admission:

> We, the authors of this text, have no substantive idea how you are
> reading it.

We could have extended that to add that we have no idea who you are,
either. We think you’re creative. Interested in books, or experience
design. We hope you have ambition, that you want to do interesting stuff
with digital technology and books. We’d like it if some of you were
writers. Publishers, editors. People involved in making ***stuff***.

But we *don’t* know.

We can control certain things though. If we have this book printed,
bound and distributed in bookshops, and you’re reading this, then we
know you have access to those. That you live in a town, a city, or
somewhere that still has a high street. If we only make the same product
available by mail order, to a specialist audience, then we can make
other assumptions about you. If we chose a digital-only distribution
system, then we can extend and change some of those affordances - of the
book itself, and our readers. Craig Mod wrote one of the most insightful
commentaries on this in 2011 - *Post-Artifact Books and Publishing*
[^1]- and it’s fair to say that we’ve taken Mod’s writing as a starting
point any number of times in this book. Central to the argument in
*Post-Artifact Books* is that the digital artifact is a scaffold between
two states- a pre-artifact system in which texts are created in
realtime, updated and modified in public; shared and commented upon;
played even, and a post-artifact model in which that ‘*finished*’ text
is shared and owned and updated; iterated after the fact in just as real
a time. The essay goes on to make a case for a robust platform, or set
of frameworks, for annotating and extending the moment of reading a
text, but for our purposes, let’s come back to the idea that a digital
artefact is a scaffold between those two states. Before it is complete,
a digital experience (to classify in broader terms) is intention and
form, content fighting for space and all, all potential. It embodies a
state, as this chapter suggested earlier, of pre-reification, of promise
without sure knowledge. After it is *live*, after it becomes a *minumum
viable product*, then it lives, it is experienced and all of that
promise becomes realised. It becomes a sequence of moments in time, each
mediated by their reader in a personal manner.

While making those moments is the primary concern of this book, this
note wants to address what they do to readers.

If you think of the artefact, the experience, as a scaffold; something
inherently temporary, then the task of curating readers might be (I have
no idea what I’m going to write next and so I’m going to write something
else and see if that helps)…

[^1]: The essay is also available on [Kindle](http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B005568MZE?keywords=Post-Artifact%20Books%20and%20Publishing&qid=1437928031&ref_=sr_1_1&sr=8-1). It’s a couple of quid.
    Go and buy it and support good writing.
