---
title: "Let’s talk about Hybridity"
date: "2015-07-25 13:50:41"
return: /What_do_books_do.html
---

Yes, let’s. We’ve skirted around the subject for so long, teasing the
definition and suggesting that it is somehow superior to the status quo

One of the things we’ve tried to make clear is that writing for a
digital platform as if *it was something else* is not going to get you
very far. Digital books aren’t novels, they have a set of structural
affordances that physical books don’t have. They mix, remix and mash
text. They invite reading in an unconstrained order. They ask you to get
up out of your chair and walk around. The thing you read on isn’t a book
anymore, so let’s stop pretending that you’re always going to regard it,
to respond to it, the same way. It will make use of platforms in ways
that a conventional book cannot. These might be subtle, hidden things,
or they might foreground the whole narrative experience. Either way, if
you’re merging two (or more) media, what you’re actually doing is
allowing a hybrid form to emerge.

The best way to start might be to think about why nature makes hybrids.
The simple answer is survival. A successful hybrid might be better
equipped to propagate itself, ensuring the survival of a genus, carrying
a parental strain of identity into a changed ecological scenario. It
might be arise when one of the parent species is under threat from
changes in a natural habitat. Some of these are so successful that we
stop thinking of them as new, or strange in any way. Grapefruit are
hybrids, as is most bread wheat. Peppermint too. Killer Bees (yes,
they’re real) are hybrids. Not all hybrids are successful though. Nature
does not always find a way (although, I am delighted to discover that a
wholphin is a real thing).

If nature makes hybrids, humans make them too. We cross-fertilize plants
to make hardier strains. We bred Killer Bees in the 1950s by cross
breeding African and European Honey Bees in order to increase honey
production. Leaving aside the fact that 26 swarms escaped (and have
spread across the Americas since then), the simplicity of the idea is
what you should focus on. To increase honey production. There was a
single, identifiable aim, and that was what drove the project. To create
a hybrid form for writing, adopt the same clarity.

*What are you trying to achieve?*

It should, we propose, be as simple as ‘increasing honey production’. It
has to be something - if it isn’t, if you’re merging two storytelling
forms with no real idea as to why, then there’s no more honey, there’s
only money being spent. The novel is perfectly fine where it is,
thankyou. If you’re determined to port it into a new platform, then that
platform has to alter something, offer some way to tell the story that
isn’t possible in a conventional form. Otherwise the ghost of the book
will manifest, clanking its chains in horror.

Hybridity, here, should also serve story. Make no mistake, if you’re
showing off the technology, telling the same thing in fully immersive VR
without thinking about *what it does to the story* then you’ve wasted
your time. After the oos and the aahs, when the dust settles and your
audience think about what they experienced, they’re going to talk about
the platform and not the story. Let’s see if this helps:

Tarkovsky is a hybrid writer.

There. That sentence has sat in my notes folder for this book since we
drew up the first outline. I’ve been waiting to get to it, to make this
argument, for weeks.

Tarkovsky is a deliberate filmmaker. He chooses, very carefully, what he
wants to show us, and how he’s going to show us those things he
considers important. Especially, for the purpose of this essay,
*Stalker* is an exercise in film as a hybrid form. The novel *Roadside
Picnic* from which *Stalker* draws most of its scaffolding is not the
film, that much is clear. At a formal level, *Roadside Picnic* is a set
of chronologically sequenced narratives exploring the existence and
nature of six *Zones* of extraterrestrial significance across the world.
The novel is primarly concerned with the zone situated outside the town
of Harmont (the precise location is not clear), and is constrcucted as
four episodes in the life of a Stalker, Red Schuhart. The events of
*Roadside Picnic* are echoed in *Stalker*, but Tarkovsky is concered
with the formal qualities of film narrative as he sees them. An
Aristotelean unity of:

-   action (the story shoud contain one main action, with few (if any)
    subplots)
-   time (the story takes place over no more than 24 hours)
-   location (the story covers one physical space - no compression
    of geography)

is at work in the film, and absent from the novel. Tarkovsky is making
film, not writing a novel, and he understands that we read film in a
compressed, artifical space and time. As such, *Stalker* is not
permitted the digressions in time and space afforded to the novel, which
is a less linear object than his film. He’s made a hybrid form by
merging the book and his film, the point of which, Tarkovsky’s ‘make
more honey’ is the representation of an Aristotelean unity. His plot
(summary stolen here from Geoff Dyer); a guide, or Stalker, takes two
people, Writer and Professor, into a forbidden area called the Zone, at
the heart of which is the Room, where your deepest wish will come true;
is amongst the most direct ever made. Everything else in the film - be
it the non-diagetic sound design, Tarkovsky’s obsession with
metaphysics, the history of the gulags, even the allusions to Christ,
are all in service of that story and that unity of storytelling.

Writing a hybrid form is as simple as that. The rest, as they say, is
blood, sweat and tears. The idea. Your ‘make more honey’. Circumstance’s
*These Pages Fall Like Ash* (our physical/digital book hybrid) is about
evoking and imagining another city alongside your own. What we do with
that is tied up in the way you read the piece - slipping between an
unconventional wooden-bound book and a set of geographically specific
narrative chunks delivered as you traverse your own city - but it is all
about the other city, and the evocation happens in the space inside your
head.

If this is all a little definitive, a little dictatorial, then take
heart. The decisions you make about your hybrid will be new, because
hybrids, by their nature, are new. They are a clash of forms, mediated
through an idea.
