---
title: "What has been done?"
date: "2015-07-25 12:59:22"
category: How_did_we_get_here
sort: 2
---

It’s not quite appropriate to liken a multi-decade-old medium
to a toddler. A more appropriate analogy would be a teenager at a dance,
trying to flirt for the first time: a person who is still rocketing
through change trying their first tentative steps at what they see to be
a grownup thing. The advent of tablet computers and the rise of ebooks
has given us several choice examples: digital writing attempting to
charm the pants off somebody and, for the first time, facing the
terrifying possibility of succeeding.

The advances digital writing is making are on three fronts:

-   Phone and tablet apps: native applications go the furthest in
    experimenting with tactics and methods that are unique to
    digital media.
-   Websites: the most widespread form of digital, or neoteric, writing,
    also the one that is the most established and set as a genre. The
    web world is picking up ideas and concepts from the native app world
    at a faster pace than many expected.
-   Ebooks: the form of digital writing that clings the hardest to the
    conventions, codes, and practices of print media, often going to
    extraordinary technical lengths to disable, remove, or prevent
    tropes, conventions, and means that are native to digital media.

Touchpress’ (supported by Faber and Faber) The Wasteland stands out
amongst recent impositions of literary works to a digital environment.
Taking Elliot’s 434 lines as it’s starting point, the iPad app
deconstructs the experience of reading a linear poem, and re-presents
the digital text as an exploration of meaning, significance and context
by means of Ezra Pound’s annotations to Elliot’s draft, (etc.). Strip
away the technically mediated, affective layer of The Wasteland’s iPad
instantiation and it is evident that the app is designed around the
materially original (one might suggest scroll-like) format of the poem.
The app does not simply remediate that form though; slavishly
transferring its affordances to a new platform and intending the work to
be read in an identical manner as its physical counterpart; it undergoes
a process of transposition by which the material original is not copied,
nor removed, rather its affordances as a ‘readable’ text are addressed
within the transfer to a new formal environment. We are encouraged, as
students of Elliot, to read The Wasteland with a book of annotations
beside us. The app affords this. We are familiar with the nuance of the
spoken word with regard to poetry; interpretation, emphasis, temporal
specificity all impact in meaning; the app presents readings from 1933
(Elliot) through to contemporary performances (Fiona Shaw’s filmed
performance) by way of Alec Guinness, Ted Hughes and Viggo Mortensen. We
approach Elliot’s work as acolytes, as scholars, a position the app
enforces.

Flipboard is an app that aggregates various news items, blog posts,
pictures, videos, etc., from all over the net. It’s both mass media – it
has a curated set of news feeds you can read – and micro media, with its
deep customisability. Being an aggregator is unique enough to digital
media but Flipboard has taken a central role, not only in setting design
trends but also because of the lead its lead designer, Craig Mod, has
taken in online discourse on the nature of digital writing. It manages
to take its inspiration from offline print affordances while still
remaining uniquely digital. The folding pagination animation it uses
refers to the act of turning a physical page but actually represents an
act that is impossible in print, pages just don’t turn like that. No
matter what you think about its nature as an aggregator and no matter
what you think of the writings of its lead designer, the app itself
represents a mature understanding on how digital can reuse print
affordances without being a slave to them.

Visual Editions (a London-based boutique publisher of bespoke editions)
venture into the book-App market has, to date, been an edition of Marc
Saporta’s Composition No.1. Saporta’s original text - a boxed ‘novel’
printed on 150 unbound pages which asks the reader to shuffle and read
in any order, deriving meaning from accidental juxtaposition and
aleatory connection - is repurposed for a tablet platform in exactly the
same format as the physical original. The reader lets pages skim past,
only stopping to read when a finger is pressed upon the screen. The page
rests as long as a connection is maintained, upon removal, the motion
begins again and a new, randomly chosen page is revealed at the next
intervention. Once a page has been read, it cannot (in that sequence) be
re-read. The digital edition, curiously, is more successful than
Saporta’s 1962 print experiment. The sensation induced by our inability
to accurately control the next page we read is more pronounced than in
the boxed edition. No-one who has ever shuffled a deck of cards can deny
that control is always present to some degree. Magicians make careers of
it. Within a digital instantiation of the same process, human
intervention is reduced to a truly random moment, and there is no going
back. Like The Wasteland before it though, Composition No.1 is built on
a thorough and considered understanding of the material process of
reading its physical forebear.

By far the most popular incarnation of new, interactive, text is the
web, which ranges from the facile and trivial to the complex and
involved. News, personal journals, fiction, commentary, recipes, travel
guides, tech references, how-to guides - the web has already absorbed
large segments of what before was an indivisible part of non-fiction
publishing. Digital writing is already a profitable and successful mass
medium, all managed without pushing books into extinction. To keep
insisting on a dichotomy of print versus digital is to ignore the fact
that digital has moved on. It has become its own thing, with its own
dynamics, styles, tropes, structures, and patterns of authorship. It’s
also managed to do this without saddling webpages with detailed and
realistic simulations of print behaviour. The scroll, hyperlinks,
navigation, animations, transitions, embedded movies, are all
implemented without the slightest visual or tactile reference to a print
counterpart.

The best example of a relatively accomplished interactive text platform
that has saddled itself with spurious and useless replicas of the print
context would be Apple’s iBooks. Normal, text-oriented, ebooks grow
further and further away from being print replicas with every successive
update, but it’s graphic novels that represent the pinnacle of mimicry
of physical objects as a user interface (often referred to as
skeuomorphism). iBooks renders each page of the graphic novel as a
realistic simulation of an actual page, something that is at first
jarring when the book is opened, the cover flipped open, and the reader
finds the cover as the first page. Comixology, a much more popular
digital platform for comics, has taken another direction. It eschews
skeuomorphisms and instead renders the page full-screen, no fake page
shadows or animated page curls. This lets them do uniquely digital
things such as adapt the page to screen sizes and let the app guide you
towards an optimal reading for your device. iBooks, by choosing to
replicate print when displaying graphic novels and fixed layout ebooks,
offers a compromised experience that can’t adapt or fully take advantage
of the digital context.
