---
title: "Where are we now?"
date: "2015-07-25 12:59:02"
category: How_did_we_get_here
sort: 1
---

Ebooks undoubtedly mimic the pages of print, transforming them from
unavoidable fixtures of the medium to a optional tactic to control the
structure and pacing of reading.

Digital text is structured prose, just like print text, but it gains a
new, important, feature: links. In the words of hypertext toolmaker,
Mark Bernstein: ‘the most important new punctuation mark since the
comma’.1

Digital text gives a writer the freedom to be less textual if they wish,
adding video clips, audio, and assorted interactive elements into the
mix.

Digital text exists and is produced within a completely different
context from print and, as we shall see, the changes it introduces bring
with them their own distinct set of problems.

Here is one problem that will not, despite how much we wish to, go away:

We, the authors of this text, have no substantive idea how you are
reading it. You might be flicking between the simulated pages of an
electronic remediation of the original text assembled and bound for
print publication, you might be reading that primary, intentionally
designed, bound and printed physical book, these words might appear from
a print-on-demand service, each page freshly produced for you the moment
your credit card was accepted, or several years hence, you could be
browsing the text we are writing on a device hitherto unseen, it might
come to you through the droning of the computer’s simulated voice, or as
disjointed fragments quoted somewhere on a blog, a twitterfeed or
projected into empty air by the next-but-one incarnation of the
e-reader.

Modern text, mashed around through fluid digital media, simply cannot
remain a fixed object. If you want to, you can choose to make it a fixed
object, but then you obscure its specific advantages. Within a digital
environment if you want the text to adapt itself to computers, mobile
phones, tablets, screen readers, websites, and that one guy who
everybody knows who still prints out everything he reads, you have to
let it be and let go of all the expectations that have been bred through
the last few hundred years of the printed page. Something that manifests
as a passion for craft, awareness of the art, a steadfast belief in the
power of the medium in print, becomes obsessive-compulsive control
freakery in digital.

Digital typography ranges from the wispy but detailed beauty of the new
iPad’s retina display to the chunky ‘wet newspaper’ grey smear of an
older Kindle’s eink. The effect of a static user interface affordance
changes from context to context. Pagination does completely different
things to a text when its produced on a small mobile phone screen
instead of a large tablet. Links signify different behaviour in an
ereader like the Kindle than they do on a website in a browser. It’s all
a bit slippery and wet and hard to grasp.

What makes this even harder is that you can’t lock the text down even if
you wanted to (and you shouldn’t if you could); the reader expects a
degree of control, not just over the presentation, but also how the text
is used. They expect to be able to copy and paste passages into their
blog or Facebook so they can talk about them with their friends. They
anticipate the ability to tweet sentences without retyping them
manually. They demand to be able to highlight and comment on the text
itself, their notes being searchable, re-flowable, pieces of digital
texts themselves, existing on the border of another.

They expect reading and writing to be two sides of the same coin, more
intermingled and intertwined than they ever were in print. Their reading
bleeds out into their blogs, forums, essays, Facebook updates through
easy quoting and extensive links, creating direct connections between
the original text and the new meta-contextual satellite texts. Research
tools, like Evernote, that collect text and writing, are also writing
tools. Digital reading and digital writing haven’t just locked
hands—they’ve done the deed, married and have a brood of misbehaving
little brats.

Text starts out as one thing and becomes several others.

That, in a nutshell, is one of the principal problems facing authors in
a converged age - the degree of slippage between the intended form of
the text, and the control the reader is afforded over that form, has
only increased year on year. As new platforms emerge and bring with them
associated publishing standards, complex reflows of typography and
layout, the relationship between physical and digital looks ever more
unsustainable.

The mistake many make is to assume that digital text is somehow married
to print, that, since the former won’t displace the latter, they will
exist in a continuing symbiosis. But print is the ex in this
relationship, not the soulmate. Demands are made of digital text by its
readers and by its context that it will find hard to accommodate if it
remains bound to print. You can’t expect all ebooks to be remediations
of a print text any more than you can expect all films to be adaptations
of plays. The new thing has to go off and do its new things, making its
mistakes, stumbling and learning to walk all by itself.
